Isolated diastolic hypertension (IDH), defined as diastolic blood pressure in the hypertensive range but systolic blood pressure not in the hypertensive range, is not uncommon (<20%) among adults with hypertension. IDH often manifests in concurrence with other cardiovascular risk factors. Individuals with IDH tend to have lower awareness of their hypertension compared with those with both systolic and diastolic hypertension. IDH appears to be a largely underrated risk factor for cardiovascular disease events, which may be explained by inconsistent association of IDH with cardiovascular disease events. The inconsistency suggests that IDH is heterogeneous. One size does not seem to fit all in the clinical management of individuals with IDH. Rather than treating IDH as a monolithic low-risk condition, detailed phenotyping in the context of individual comprehensive cardiovascular risk would seem to be most useful to assess an individual’s expected net benefit from therapy. In this review, we highlight that the clinical relevance of IDH differs by individual clinical characteristics, and elucidate groups of individuals with IDH that should be wary of cardiovascular disease risks.
People with isolated diastolic hypertension (IDH) have the lowest rate of awareness of their hypertension compared with people with isolated systolic hypertension (ISH: systolic blood pressure [SBP] in the hypertensive range but diastolic blood pressure [DBP] not in the hypertensive range) and with systolic and diastolic hypertension (SDH: both SBP and DBP in the hypertensive range).1 In a large cohort of adults in a large health care system, higher levels of SBP had a greater impact on hypertension diagnosis than did higher levels of DBP.2 These findings suggest that IDH is a largely underrated risk factor for cardiovascular disease (CVD) events. These trends may be attributable to the long-standing debate about which BP components ultimately determine CVD events. In the 1970s, physicians tended to regard DBP as more important than SBP on the grounds that DBP is more closely related to end-organ damage.3 The decision to use DBP as the basis for therapeutic intervention for hypertension was based primarily on knowledge gained from clinical trials. Later, several observational studies and clinical trials demonstrated a greater association of SBP rather than DBP with CVD event incidence, which led to a paradigm shift focusing on SBP in the management of hypertension. Both the Sixth Joint National Committee on the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure in 1997 and the World Health Organization/International Society of Hypertension guidelines subcommittee recommended that both SBP and DBP levels should be used for risk assessment and treatment.4,5 In 2000, the clinical advisory statement from the National High Blood Pressure Education Program highlighted that SBP become the major criterion for diagnosis, staging, and therapeutic management of hypertension, particularly in middle-aged and older adults.6 Currently, most BP management guidelines do not specifically address IDH as a distinct phenotype or provide any specific guidance for its management.7,8 This choice by the guideline authors may be due to prior studies reporting inconsistent associations of IDH with CVD events, and by a lack of randomized clinical trials that have reported benefits of pharmacological interventions among adults with IDH. The inconsistency in the findings of prior studies suggests that IDH is heterogeneous. From a public health perspective, clarifying the mechanisms that may explain these inconsistencies may enable identification of the subgroup of individuals with IDH for whom a preventive intervention could have the most beneficial effect.
Age-Related BP Trends
BP tends to increase with age.9,10 However, the pattern differs by BP component (ie, SBP, DBP, pulse pressure, and mean arterial pressure). This divergent pattern may be related to distinctive hemodynamics and pathophysiologic associations with specific BP components.11,12 Both DBP and mean arterial pressure, at least up to 50 years of age, reflect a steady state load of BP and are representative of resistant vessel structure and function alterations.13,14 Pulse pressure is a measure of pulsatile pressure load and representative of large arterial (aortic) stiffness.11,12 SBP is an integrated measure of steady and pulsatile pressure load.
The FHS (Framingham Heart Study), which included predominantly white individuals of Western European descent, demonstrated that after age 50 to 60 years, DBP declines while SBP continues to linearly increase; thus, pulse pressure rises steeply, but mean arterial pressure values level off in most white individuals.15 In a multicohort study with 4 community-based US cohorts, which included 32 833 participants (54% female) spanning ages 5 to 98 years with longitudinal BP measurements (144 599 observations) collected for a period of 43 years (1971–2014), sex-specific BP trajectories over the life course were shown.16 There are 3 phases in hemodynamic patterns by age. Under age 50, the progressive rise in DBP suggests the predominance of increased vascular resistance. The constancy of DBP during the 50s, together with the asymptotic leveling of mean arterial pressure and increased slope of pulse pressure, suggests that increased vascular resistance and large artery stiffness are both increasing in a parallel manner. The fall in DBP in later life, coupled with a continual increase in SBP, signals a preponderance of large artery stiffness in older adults. Therefore, higher DBP reflects higher peripheral resistance in young adults, whereas DBP levels in older adults reflect both arterial stiffness (ie, lowered DBP) and peripheral resistance (ie, increased DBP). Furthermore, low DBP among older adults could also be a marker of cardiac dysfunction.17 Therefore, the interpretation of DBP levels among older adults is more complicated compared with that in younger adults.
IDH in Younger Adults
We conducted a systematic review to assess clinical outcomes associated with IDH in both the PubMed and the Embase database on March 14, 2022 (F. Kawai and A. Mizuno, see Supplemental Material). Clinical outcomes associated with IDH among young adults have been reported previously (Table S1). Except for a few studies,12,18–21 IDH has been shown to be associated with adverse outcomes, including CVD events, heart failure, atrial fibrillation, and chronic kidney disease. The limitations in studies suggesting nonsignificant associations of IDH with heath outcomes18–21 included samples not restricted to young adults (adults up to 55 years of age were recruited), and all results were based on stratified analyses.
Several studies listed in Table S1 defined IDH as having SBP <140 mm Hg and DBP ≥90 mm Hg in the office or clinic. The current European BP guideline supports this definition.8 Conversely, the 2017 American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA) BP guideline lowered the in-clinic BP thresholds for hypertension from SBP/DBP ≥140/90 mm Hg to SBP/DBP ≥130/80 mm Hg,7 and defined stage 1 hypertension as SBP 130 to 139 mm Hg or DBP 80 to 89 mm Hg. This increased the prevalence of hypertension 2- to 3-fold among young adults.7 Furthermore, this change separated IDH as stage 1 IDH (untreated SBP <130 mm Hg and DBP 80–89 mm Hg) and stage 2 IDH (untreated SBP <140 mm Hg and DBP ≥90 mm Hg). Using nationwide health screening data from the Korean National Health Insurance database (n=6 424 090; all were adults aged 20–39 years), we suggested that hazard ratios (HRs; 95% CI) for CVD events were 1.32 (1.28–1.36) in stage 1 IDH and 1.82 (1.75–1.89) in stage 2 IDH, respectively, compared with normal BP (untreated SBP <120 mm Hg and DBP <80 mm Hg).22 In another study that included adults aged 20 to 89 years in the Korean National Health Insurance database (n=8 109 484), we found strong evidence of effect modification by age on the association between IDH and CVD events (Figure S1).23 This suggests that health outcomes associated with IDH may differ between young adults and middle-aged/older adults. In that study,22 a subgroup of participants underwent at least 2 BP measurements from the baseline visit and thereafter. We assessed whether outcomes differed according to changes in the BP classification from baseline to follow-up. Among participants with stage 1 IDH at baseline, 39.9% had normal BP, 21.3% maintained stage 1 IDH, 3.8% had stage 1 ISH, 14.8% had stage 1 SDH, and 9.3% had stage 2 hypertension (SBP ≥140 mm Hg, DBP ≥90 mm Hg, or antihypertensive medication use) after a median follow-up period of 4.1 years after baseline. Participants whose BP category changed from stage 1 IDH to normal BP (untreated SBP <120 mm Hg and DBP <80 mm Hg) during follow-up had lower risk for CVD events (HRs, 0.76 [95% CIs, 0.71–0.83]) compared with their counterparts who maintained stage 1 IDH over time. From this observational study, it remains to be determined whether the observed BP reductions over time were associated with nonpharmacological or pharmacological interventions, or merely suggest that BP measured at a single occasion might not fully reflect the level of BP that attenuated individual associations of IDH with CVD events.
BP measured in the clinic setting has been the primary approach for health care providers to diagnose hypertension, recommend lifestyle modifications, and guide the initiation and titration of antihypertensive medication.7,24 For many individuals, BP levels differ substantially when measured outside versus inside of the clinic. Higher BP outside of the clinic setting is associated with increased risk for future CVD events, independently of BP measured inside of the clinic.25,26 Out-of-office BP measurement refers to the use of either ambulatory BP monitoring or home BP monitoring. These methods provide a larger number of BP measurements in conditions that are more representative of daily life compared with BP measured in conventional clinical settings. In the IDACO study (International Database of Ambulatory Blood Pressure in Relation to Cardiovascular Outcome), which includes Asian, European, and South American community-based studies, IDH on ambulatory BP monitoring, defined using the 2017 ACC/AHA BP guidelines (24-hour mean SBP <125 mm Hg and DBP ≥75 mm Hg), was statistically significantly associated with CVD events compared with normotension (24-hour mean SBP <125 mm Hg and DBP <75 mm Hg) among individuals under 50 years of age (HR, 2.87 [95% CI, 1.72–4.80]) but not those 50 years of age or older (HR, 0.98 [95% CI, 0.78–1.23).21 This suggests effect modification by age on the association between IDH and CVD events, even when defined using rigorous ascertainment of BP (P interaction <0.001).
IDH in Middle-Aged and Older Adults
Clinical outcomes associated with IDH among middle-aged and older adults have been inconsistent (Table S2). There are at least 2 limitations that might explain the inconsistent association of IDH with health outcomes.
First, the determination of true risk associated with IDH requires a clear answer to the question: “compared to whom?” When interpreting the results of a comparison between an exposed group and unexposed group, the relative risk of an exposed group should be affected not only by the impact of an exposure but also by characteristics of the unexposed group. In the ARIC study (Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities) that recruited middle-aged and older adults in the United States (n=8703; age range 46–69 years, mean age 55 years), McEvoy et al27 assessed the association of IDH defined using the 2017 ACC/AHA BP guidelines (SBP <130 mm Hg and DBP ≥80 mm Hg) with incident CVD events over a median follow-up period of 25 years. Compared with the reference group (SBP <130 mm Hg and DBP <80 mm Hg), there were no statistically significant associations of IDH with incident CVD events (HR, 1.06 [95% CI, 0.89–1.26]). Of the 8703 participants, only 11% were defined as having IDH. Of the 934 participants with IDH, 34% were taking antihypertensive medication. Overall, there was no evidence of effect modification by median age (above or below 55 years) and by antihypertensive medication use on the association between IDH and CVD events (P interaction >0.10). However, the ARIC study did not include adults under 45 years of age. Consequently, the McEvoy study was not able to address whether the association of IDH with incident CVD events differed between younger and older adults. In another study from the ARIC study, participants with DBP 60 to 69 mm Hg or <60 mm Hg had higher prevalence of baseline high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T ≥14 ng/L (odds ratio, 1.5 [95% CI, 1.0–2.3] and 2.2 [1.2–4.1]) compared with those with DBP of 80 to 89 mm Hg.28 DBP <60 mm Hg (versus 80–89 mm Hg) was associated with incident CHD (HR, 1.5 [1.2–1.9]) and mortality (HR, 1.3 [1.1–1.6]). The mean (SD) levels of SBP were 103.4 (14.5) among participants with DBP 60–69 mm Hg, and 112.1 (13.2) among those with DBP <60 mm Hg, respectively. Therefore, they might be categorized into having SBP <130 mm Hg and DBP <80 mm Hg. This suggests that the reference group (SBP <130 mm Hg and DBP <80 mm Hg) in the McEvoy study27 might include middle-aged and older adults at high risk for subclinical and clinical CVD, which could lead to underestimation of the effects of IDH on health outcomes. We highlight the necessity to assess the risk associated with IDH by using a true low-risk normotensive comparator among middle-aged and older adults. This includes elimination of individuals with prior cardiovascular events, target organ damage, and those taking antihypertensive medication. However, these considerations were not addressed in all studies listed in Table S2. The so-called reverse causality is unlikely to be seen in young adult population, since the reference group (ie, individuals with normal BP) is expected to be healthy.
Second, the prevalence of IDH decreases with aging, and this trend is particularly apparent after age 55 years (Figure S2).1,29 Furthermore, the decreasing prevalence of IDH with aging reflects a (patho)physiological phenomenon because of increasing large artery stiffness with aging (see Age-related BP trends section). Therefore, individuals whose true intraarterial pressure is within the normal range may be misclassified as having IDH due to overestimating actual DBP. Concerns about progressive stiffening of the brachial artery and its influence on the accuracy of BP measurements have been raised among older adults (known as pseudohypertension).30 Spence emphasized that pseudohypertension is an essentially diastolic phenomenon, where diastolic readings are falsely high but systolic readings are usually underestimated.31 Pseudohypertension is expected not to have known effects of sustained high BP (eg, left ventricular hypertrophy, kidney disease, hypertensive retinopathy). Therefore, CVD risk associated with IDH among older adults might be underestimated if some IDH cases had erroneous overestimated readings. This misclassification may be minimized by BP measurements obtained on multiple occasions, with the palpation method used at the first BP measurement.
Clinical Management for Individuals With IDH
BP Measurements
Accurate measurement of BP is essential for the diagnosis and management of hypertension.7,8 Although IDH defined in real-world practice settings has been shown to be associated with increased CVD events (Tables S1 and S2),22,23,32–41 high-quality, standardized office BP measurements, as typically obtained in research studies using the auscultatory or the oscillometric method, have better reproducibility than routine office BP obtained in real-world practice settings. The 2017 ACC/AHA BP guideline recommends measuring BP ≥2 times at a clinic visit, whereas the European BP guideline recommends 3 BP measurements. In both 2017 ACC/AHA and European BP guidelines, using an average of ≥2 readings obtained on ≥2 occasions is recommended to estimate an individual’s BP. For example, 35% of individuals with in-clinic SBP/DBP on their first measurement of 140 to 159/90 to 99 mm Hg had SBP/DBP <140/90 mm Hg when the average of 3 measurements was used.42 In addition, 24% of individuals with in-clinic SBP/DBP of 120 to 139/80 to 89 mm Hg on their first measurement had SBP/DBP <120/80 mm Hg on the average of their second and third measurements. Regarding the optimal intervals for diagnosing hypertension on ≥2 occasions, evidence is lacking. The US Preventive Services Task Force suggests annual screening for hypertension in adults 40 years or older and younger adults at high risk for hypertension such as Black individuals, individuals with high-normal BP (ie, SBP of 130–139 mm Hg, DBP of 85–89 mm Hg, or both), or individuals with overweight or obesity.43
People with white-coat hypertension have high in-clinic BP but normal out-of-office BP. Many, but not all, studies have identified a minimal increase in risk of CVD complications or all-cause mortality in patients who have white-coat hypertension. Whether or not patients with white-coat hypertension should receive antihypertensive drugs is unresolved.44,45 The US guideline recommends ambulatory BP monitoring or home BP monitoring as reasonable services to screen for the presence of white-coat hypertension in adults with an untreated SBP >130 mm Hg but <160 mm Hg or DBP >80 mm Hg but <100 mm Hg. Indeed, the presence of white-coat hypertension is 2× higher among individuals with IDH compared with those with SDH (ie, high BP in both SBP and DBP).46 Assessing out-of-clinic BP using ambulatory BP monitoring and home BP monitoring may help identify groups of individuals with IDH who have increased out-of-office BP measurements and, therefore, are at high risk for subclinical and clinical CVD.
Treatments for Adults With IDH
All the studies in young adult populations that reported associations of IDH with health outcomes are observational, not interventional, and there is no evidence that pharmacological interventions improve health outcomes among young adults with IDH.
Although most studies in young adult populations suggest that individuals with IDH have a higher risk for CVD than their counterparts with normal BP, their absolute risk was low. Collectively, health care providers may not feel sufficiently well equipped to provide pharmacological interventions to these individuals. However, the lifetime risk for CVD events among young adults with IDH may be high.47,48 Antihypertensive medication in middle-aged and older adults does not completely mitigate the higher CVD risk among those with high BP compared with their counterparts who maintain normal untreated BP during young adulthood,49 suggesting long-lasting detrimental effects on health among many who experience high BP in early life. This emphasizes the need for primordial prevention with nonpharmacological and pharmacological interventions in young adults with IDH, which should lower cumulative exposure to elevated BP from young adulthood to later life and may reduce lifetime risk of CVD.
Since prior large-scale trials of antihypertensive medication have mainly focused on outcomes among adults in middle age and beyond, there is a need for future studies to identify optimal pharmacological treatment strategies for young adults with IDH. Pharmacological treatment with unclear benefit-to-harm ratios over a lifetime may be impractical for young adults. Risk stratification for these individuals may be appropriate when assessing whether lifestyle changes alone are sufficient or should be paired with pharmacological therapy. The 2017 ACC/AHA BP guideline recommends both lifestyle changes and initiation of antihypertensive medication among adults with Stage 1 IDH who have diabetes, prevalent CVD, chronic kidney disease, or an estimated 10-year atherosclerotic CVD risk of 10% or more. However, the potential benefits of antihypertensive medication treatment for young adults with IDH who are not in this group are poorly understood. Enrolling young adults with IDH and a high lifetime risk for CVD in randomized clinical trials could help determine whether a treatment benefit could be realized in a short to moderate timeframe. Subclinical CVD markers (eg, coronary artery calcium, left ventricular hypertrophy) could function as proxies for CVD events to reduce the duration and expense of these studies, and more rapidly accrue evidence to determine whether pharmacological treatments are advisable in young adults with IDH.48
Pharmacological Treatments for Middle-Aged and Older Adults With IDH
Although IDH is uncommon among middle-aged and older adults and confers a lower risk than ISH and SDH that should not be taken to imply that pharmacological treatments are unnecessary. A high probability of IDH to transition to systolic hypertension was observed among middle-aged and older adults.50 Middle-aged and older adults with ISH and SDH clearly benefit from evidence-based antihypertensive drug therapy.51 Therefore, middle-aged adults with IDH should be carefully monitored over time, with efforts made to improve their lifestyles. Unfortunately, no studies have yet defined the primary outcome as health outcomes by pharmacological interventions among middle-aged and older adults with IDH. However, several post hoc analyses from randomized clinical trials demonstrated the clinical consequences of intensifying antihypertensive treatments among middle-aged and older adults who with IDH or with increased DBP. The PROGRESS (Perindopril Protection Against Recurrent Stroke Study) tested the efficacy of a flexible BP-lowering regimen, involving an ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitor (perindopril) and a diuretic (indapamide), on the risk of stroke and other major vascular events among middle-aged and older adults with a history of stroke or transient ischemic attack.52 In post hoc analyses, participants were categorized as having ISH (SBP ≥140 mm Hg and DBP <90 mm Hg; n=1923), IDH (SBP <140 mm Hg and DBP ≥90 mm Hg; n=315), or SDH (SBP ≥140 mm Hg and DBP ≥90 mm Hg; n=2045) at baseline. Treatment intensification reduced the relative risk of composite CVD events by 27% (95% CI, 10%–41%) among patients with ISH, by 28% (−29% to 60%) among those with IDH, and by 32% (17%–45%) among those with SDH. Although the reduced risk for CVD events in the IDH group did not achieve statistical significance due to insufficient statistical power, it showed a similar effect size compared with the other groups. Indeed, there was no evidence of differences in magnitude of the effects of treatment by hypertension subtypes (P homogeneity=0.89). In the HOT trial (Hypertension Optimal Treatment), which enrolled patients aged 50 to 80 years with DBP of 100 to 115 mm Hg, patients were randomly assigned a target DBP <90 mm Hg, <85 mm Hg, or <80 mm Hg, respectively, using antihypertensive medication intensification.53 The HOT study showed the benefits of lowering DBP down to 82.6 mm Hg, and the prespecified analyses showed a 51% reduction in composite CVD events in target group <80 mm Hg versus <90 mm Hg (P for trend=0.005). There was no evidence of a J-shaped curve for the relation of CVD events with achieved BP, at least down to 70 mm Hg in DBP. In a pooled cohort analysis combining participants from the SPRINT (Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial)54 and the ACCORD-BP trial (Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes-Blood Pressure),55 Foy et al56 assessed whether there was an association between baseline DBP, intensification of BP-lowering therapy, and CVD events. Significant reductions in CVD events among patients assigned to intensive (SBP <120 mm Hg) versus standard (SBP <140 mm Hg) therapy were evident for those with baseline DBP values of 80 mm Hg (HR, 0.78 [95% CI, 0.62–0.98]) and 90 mm Hg (HR, 0.74 [95% CI, 0.55–0.98]). However, in another study using the same pooled cohort,57 lowering DBP to <60 mm Hg via treatment intensification was associated with an increased risk of CVD events. In a study of 95 545 patients of age 40 to 79 years with left ventricular hypertrophy from the Korean National Health Insurance database, an average on-treatment DBP range of 70 to 79 mm Hg was associated with the lowest risk of CVD events, while DBP <70 mm Hg was not associated with any lower risk.58 However, these results56,57 were from observational and post hoc analyses and could not address whether the observed reduction in CVD events reflected a causal relationship by lowering DBP. Any antihypertensive drugs that lower DBP could lower SBP as well. Therefore, the effects of lowering DBP on health outcomes may have merely reflected the benefit of lowering SBP. Furthermore, the efficacy of lowering DBP in the general population (eg, untreated individuals with IDH) remains unknown. Randomized clinical trials are needed to determine if a treatment benefit can be achieved in middle-aged and older adults with IDH. However, the prevalence of IDH among older adults is low, and a large sample size would be required to draw robust conclusions. In the meantime, detailed phenotyping in the context of individual comprehensive cardiovascular risk, and assessing out-of-office BP measurements and biomarkers (eg, B-type natriuretic peptide and high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T) would seem to be most useful to assess an individual’s expected net benefit from therapy.
Conclusions
We highlight that the clinical relevance of IDH differs by individual clinical characteristics (eg, age and cardiovascular risk status), and elucidate groups of individuals with IDH that should be wary of CVD risks. IDH is heterogeneous. One size does not seem to fit all in the clinical management of individuals with IDH. Rather than treating IDH as a monolithic low-risk condition, detailed phenotyping beyond just assessing BP measurements in the office is required to determine who is most at risk for developing CVD risk and in whom nonpharmacological or pharmacological interventions are likely to be the most effective.
Footnote
Nonstandard Abbreviations and Acronyms
ACC	American College of Cardiology
ACE	angiotensin-converting enzyme
AHA	American Heart Association
ARIC	Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities
BP	blood pressure
CVD	cardiovascular disease
DBP	diastolic blood pressure
FHS	Framingham Heart Study
HOT	Hypertension Optimal Treatment
HR	hazard ratio
IDACO	International Database of Ambulatory Blood Pressure in Relation to Cardiovascular Outcome
IDH	isolated diastolic hypertension
ISH	isolated systolic hypertension
PROGRESS	Perindopril Protection Against Recurrent Stroke Study
SBP	systolic blood pressure
SDH	systolic and diastolic hypertension